---
layout: default
---

<h2>Preface</h2>
<div id='preface' class='section'>
	<h2>Acknowledgements</h2>
	<p>
		This research was realised by Marta Fioravanti, Tong Zhang, Weixuan Yang for the Introduction to Data Journalism module at King's College London, MA in Digital Humanities.
	</p>
	<p>
		The project folder can be accessed <a href='https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1WXYNyHFySH_r_8CM6M6sdT0XfeC4CP9Q?usp=sharing'>here</a>
	</p>
</div>
<div id='introduction' class='section'>
	<h2>Introduction</h2>
	<div class='texts'>
		<p>
			This research observes users and communities around the #ddj hashtag on Twitter. It intends to find the most important ones, to explore the geographical factors associated with them. It aims to  understand the online ecosystem of data journalism and the real people behind it. 
		</p>
		<p>
			In general, the accounts that are actively engaging in data journalism discussion in 2020 have formed several groups based on their roles in the news industry, the media they are involved in, and the geographic area they locate. Most of the narrative readings resonate with the values and themes associated with news and investigative journalism at different levels (Bounegru et al., 2017). 
		</p>
		<p>
			This research combines qualitative and quantitative approaches. It is composed of three stages: the data preprocessing, data mining and data interpretation. Only users with the most in-coming or out-coming mentions were kept;  the Leiden algorithm generated well-connected clusters. These users’ Twitter profile information was then analysed, trying to map their network and explore the characteristics of each cluster.
		</p>
	</div>
</div>
<h2>Analysis #00</h2>
<h2>The characteristics of each cluster</h2>
<div class='section'>
	<h2>Description</h2>
	<div class='texts'>
		<p>
			Using the Leiden algorithm, twelve communities were extracted: two of them were pruned since they were too small and sparse; the others were examined qualitatively to discern their characteristics.
		</p>
	</div>
	<h2>Question</h2>
	<div class='texts'>
		<p>
			Mapping the communities in the online discussion around data journalism hashtags and finding out characteristics of different clusters.
		</p>
	</div>
	<h2>Research protocol</h2>
	<div class='texts'>
		<p></p>
	</div>
	<h2>Findings</h2>
	<div class='texts'>
		<p>
			The communities were generated by analysing the network of mentions between users, that is why some clusters seem to exist around one specific account. These clusters are generally associated with the partnership of organizations or with geographical factors.
		</p>
	</div>
	<svg id='viz_1'></svg>
	<div id='group_legend'>
		<h5>Communities</h5>
	</div>
	<div id='legend' class='hidden'>
		<h5>User Information</h5>
		<div class='legend_info'>
			<h5>Username</h5>
			<p id='username'></p>
		</div>
		<div class='group_info' id='cluster_info'>
			<h5>Cluster:</h5>
			<p id='cluster'></p>
		</div>
		<div class='legend_info'>
			<h5 style='color: #4169E1;'>Mentioned:</h5>
			<p id='in_ment' style='color: #4169E1;'></p>
		</div>
		<div class='legend_info'>
			<h5 style='color: #FA8072;'>Mentioning:</h5>
			<p id='out_ment' style='color: #FA8072;'></p>
		</div>
	</div>
</div>
<div id='communities_in_depth' class='section'>
	<h2>The communities</h2>
	<p>
		How does each community contribute and act in the Data Journalism field? In this section, each cluster is analysed to discern its nature.
	</p>
	<div id='cluster_0' class='subsection'>
		<h5 class='g_0'>Cluster 0: the big soup</h5>
		<p>
			Cluster 0 witnesses a higher level of diversity with respect of account owners' nationality, active region and identity. It involves users from Europe (about 63% Germany), North America (90% US), Central and South America (nearly 92% Brazil), along with some accounts from Asia and Africa.
		</p>
		<p>
			Quite all the accounts are mentioned by <a href='https://twitter.com/gijn' target='blank'>@gijn</a> (Global Investigative Journalism Network) but this is not a discriminator from other communities, since many users from <a href='#cluster_1' class='g_1'>cluster 1</a>, <a href='#cluster_2' class='g_2'>cluster 2</a>, <a href='#cluster_3' class='g_3'>cluster 3</a>, and <a href='#cluster_4' class='g_4'>cluster 4</a> are mentioned by this organisation. 
		</p>
	</div>
	<div id='cluster_1' class='subsection'>
		<h5 class='g_1'>Cluster 1: news organizations and data teams</h5>
		<p>
			This community mainly contains accounts of big news organizations and their teams, data visualization tools, and non-profit organizations. These accounts seldom mention others within or outside their cluster. 
		</p>
		<p>
			The reason why they are grouped together is probably they are either mentioned by <a href='https://twitter.com/gijnafrica' target='blank'>@gijnafrica</a> or <a href='https://twitter.com/WarningGraphicC' target='blank'>@WarningGraphicC</a>, with the former dedicating in sharing investigative journalism and the latter providing daily links on data journalism and visualization. 
		</p>
	</div>
	<div id='cluster_2' class='subsection'>
		<h5 class='g_2'>Cluster 2: non-profit journalist network organizations and Sigma Awards</h5>
		<p>
			Cluster two is composed of non-profit journalist network organizations and accounts around sigma awards. Most of these journalist network organizations are interrelated and have a partnership with each other. Besides, there are accounts of sigma awards and its founders and managers. In the meanwhile, the journalist network organizations such as <a href='https://twitter.com/IJNet' target='blank'>@IJNet</a> and <a href='https://twitter.com/IRE' target='blank'>@IRE</a> are sigma awards’ media partners, which indicates that sigma awards has a close connection with those international and regional journalist centers. 
		</p>
	</div>
	<div id='cluster_3' class='subsection'>
		<h5 class='g_3'>Cluster 3: around datajournalism.com</h5>
		<p>
			This community revolves around <a href='https://twitter.com/datajournalism' target='blank'>@datajournalism</a>, which mentions almost every account in this cluster. The accounts are mainly regional media organizations and data journalists around the world. Six of them are also contributors of datajournalism.com.
		</p>
	</div>
	<div id='cluster_4' class='subsection'>
		<h5 class='g_4'>Cluster 4: BBC and BCU</h5>
		<p>
			In this cluster we can mainly find British data journalists' personal accounts, which can be divided into BBC-related accounts and BCU-related accounts.
		</p>
		<p>
			The former are those who used to work or currently work for BBC, while the latter either teach or receive the data journalism-related degree in Birmingham City University. 
		</p>
		<p>
			The reason why these two groups of accounts are merged into one cluster is that <a href='https://twitter.com/paulbradshaw' target='blank'>@paulbradshaw</a> has interaction with both BBC-related accounts and BCU-related accounts. He has worked with the BBC England data unit since 2015, and leads the MA in Data, Multiplatform and Mobile Journalism at Birmingham City University.
		</p>
	</div>
	<div id='cluster_5' class='subsection'>
		<h5 class='g_5'>Cluster 5: Nigeria</h5>
		<p>
			The 80% of this cluster’s accounts is originary from Nigeria. Although they are not dominant in numbers, these accounts have showed variety in respect of category. Among them there are civic organisation, international development, non-governmental organisations, research organisation, news agency.
		</p>
		<p> 
			It emerges <a href='https://twitter.com/Dataphyte' target='blank'>@Dataphyte</a>, a journalist and entrepreneur who has started online study website of data methods.
		</p>
	</div>
	<div id='cluster_6' class='subsection'>
		<h5 class='g_6'>Cluster 6: Northern Europe</h5>
		<p>
			All of this cluster’s accounts originate in Western and Northern European countries like Netherlands, France and Denmark, or locate in the capital of European Union, Brussels. 
		</p>
		<p> 
			The most active accounts of this cluster are EU <a href='https://twitter.com/EU_opendata' target='blank'>@EU_opendata</a>, an event to be held in 23-25th November 2021, and a student assistant editor <a href='https://twitter.com/MarieSchoenning' target='blank'>@MarieSchoenning</a> of UvA Amsterdam, an intellectual hub of the Netherlands.
		</p>
	</div>
	<div id='cluster_78' class='subsection'>
		<h5 class='no_g'><span class='g_7'>Cluster 7</span> and <span class='g_8'>Cluster 8</span>: Brazil</h5>
		<p>
			The accounts within these two clusters are in Brazil, addressing politics, education, health, security issues in Brazil and sometimes Latin America. Another thing they have in common is that they are all professionals in journalism. 
		</p>
	</div>
	<div id='cluster_9' class='subsection'>
		<h5 class='g_9'>Cluster 9: global</h5>
		<p>
			Three organisation accounts led by western countries, radiating the whole world. It includes UN World Data Forum (<a href='https://twitter.com/UNDataForum' target='blank'>@UNDataForum</a>), which is an annual event funded by The United Nations. 
		</p>
		<p> 
			The other two accounts, Earth Journalism Network (<a href='https://twitter.com/earthjournalism' target='blank'>@earthjournalism</a>) and Resources Watch (<a href='https://twitter.com/resource_watch' target='blank'>@resource_watch</a>) are both initiated in US, addressing environmental topics.
		</p>
	</div>
</div>
<div id='roles_in_net' class='section'>
	<h2>Roles in the network</h2>
	<h5>Distribution of incoming mentions</h5>
	<svg id='viz_2' class='small_viz'></svg>
	<h5>Distribution of outcoming mentions</h5>
	<svg id='viz_3' class='small_viz'></svg>
	<div class='texts'>
		<p>
			There are three classes of users: the mostly inactive, the spreaders (those who mention other users), and the ones that are mostly mentinoed: the stars.
		</p>
		<p>
			As we can expect, the majority of users fall in the first category: the casual users. Most of them were excluded from the analysis.
			For what concerns the other two classes, it emerged that they don't often overlap: the cases at the limit of the distributions tend to primarly mention other users or to be cited by many people. 
		</p>
		<p>
			This is not surprising since there exist accounts made for spreading specific contents made by and addressed to a precise target, in this case (data) journalists, activists, and designers. 
		</p>
	</div>
</div>
<div id='local_actors' class='section'>
	<h2>Actors in the network (local view)</h2>
	<div class='texts'>
		<p>
			It is useful to understand in what measure each user contributes to the Data Journalism community on Twitter. This section reveals the most active, the most influential, and the spreaders users. For the moment, the classification excludes the users outside the communities so that it is possible to discover eventual dominances inside them. 
		</p>
		<p>
			A profile was considered <strong>active</strong> if it produces a large amount of tweets, <strong>influential</strong> if many other users cite its work. It was named a <strong>spreader</strong> if it maily retweet other users' work.
		</p>
		<p>
			About activness, two rankings were realised: one considering retweets as valid contributions, and the other excluding them because they do not contain original material.
		</p>
		<p>
			Since a Tweeter action consists in the publication of an original (tweet) or of a third part (retweet) content, a user can be considered active also if they retweet a lot. For this reason, we excluded retweets in the count of mentions when looking for the spreaders and the influencers.
		</p>
	</div>
	<h5>Activity ranking including retweets</h5>
	<svg id='viz_8' class='small_viz'></svg>
	<h5>Activity ranking excluding retweets</h5>
	<svg id='viz_9' class='small_viz'></svg>
	<div class='texts'>
		<p>
			At a first glance, it seems more useful to look at the data without retweets. Here we can find that the 4 out of 10 users belong to <a href='#cluster_1' class='g_1'>cluster 1</a>. It is not so surprising, considering that it is primarly populated by big news agencies. 
		</p>
		<p>
			<a href="https://twitter.com/gijn" target="blank">@gijn</a> can be considered the most active user, also considering the other plot: as we see, it retweeted only 22 times, much less than the 192 of <a href="https://twitter.com/pinadrag" target="blank">@pinadrag</a>. It is visible that these two users are significantly over the average number of #ddj tweets in 2020, around 2.5 (excluding the zero values).
		</p>
	</div>
	<h5>The mentioners</h5>
	<svg id='viz_10' class='small_viz'></svg>
	<h5>The most mentioned</h5>
	<svg id='viz_11' class='small_viz'></svg>
	<div class='texts'>
		<p>
			This second analysis focuses on the level of interaction between the users (excluding retweets). The situation displayed by the plots shows <a href='#cluster_1' class='g_1'>cluster 1</a> as very present among the top 10 spreaders.
		</p>
		<p>
			If <a href="https://twitter.com/pinadrag" target="blank">@pinadrag</a> disappears, <a href="https://twitter.com/gijn" target="blank">@gijn</a> continues to dominate the rankings, consolidating its role of authority in Data Journalism, at least on Twitter.
			Also <a href="https://twitter.com/datajournalism" target="blank">@datajournalism</a>, the third most active user, confirms its position of importance becoming the second most mentioned in the network.
		</p>
		<p>
			Another aspect to notice is that <a href='#cluster_0' class='g_0'>cluster 0</a> receives a large amount of mentions. Given the nature of its composition it can be foreseen that these are principally interactions inside the cluster. A qualitative proof of that is the visual display of the community in the <a href='#viz_1'>network visualisation</a> at the beginning of the article. 
		</p>
	</div>
</div>
<div id='global_actors' class='section'>
	<h2>A global glance at the most important users</h2>
	<div class='texts'>
		<p>
			It is useful to compare the local placements (inside the network) with the global ones because some important actors not strongly belonging to a community could emerge.
		</p>
	</div>
	<h5>Ranking including retweet activity</h5>
	<svg id='viz_6' class='small_viz'></svg>
	<div class='note'>
		<p>
			The ranking including retweets contained at the first place @jornalismoDados with 6773 tweets. We decided to drop this information for the reasons explained in the <a href='#reason_jornalismoDados'>following subsection</a>. 
		</p>
	</div>
	<h5>Ranking excluding retweet activity</h5>
	<svg id='viz_7' class='small_viz'></svg>
	<div class='texts'>
		<p>
			The global plots show the presence of a consistent number of independent users at the top of the placement. These could suggest the presence of less represented communities, like the Russian one (suggested by <a href='https://twitter.com/gijnRu' target='blank'>@gijnRu</a>) and the Turkish one (suggested by <a href='https://twitter.com/DagmedyaVeri' target='blank'>@DagmedyaVeri</a>).
		</p>
	</div>
	<h5>The mentioners</h5>
	<svg id='viz_4' class='small_viz'></svg>
	<div class='note'>
		<p>
			The classification of the mentioners contained at the first place @jornalismoDados with 13649 outcoming citations. We decided to drop this information for the reasons explained in the next paragraphs. 
		</p>
	</div>
	<h5>The most mentioned</h5>
	<svg id='viz_5' class='small_viz'></svg>
	<div class='texts' id='reason_jornalismoDados'>
		<p>A big anomaly was found: the two users at the top
			of the ranks, <a href='https://twitter.com/EscolaDeDados' target='blank'>@EscolaDeDados</a> and @journalismoDados probably represent the same institution. The latter was deleted before 2021 in favor of <a href='https://twitter.com/EscolaDeDados' target='blank'>@EscolaDeDados</a>, which is part of <a href='#cluster_0' class='g_0'>cluster 0</a>.
		</p>
		<p>
			Since the distribution of the most mentioned users is more likely, it can be assumed that <a href='https://twitter.com/EscolaDeDados' target='blank'>@EscolaDeDados</a> is an important user, even if maybe not at the first position. 
		</p>
		<p>
			Again, <a href='https://twitter.com/gijn' target='blank'>@gijn</a>, <a href='https://twitter.com/pinadrag' target='blank'>@pinadrag</a> and <a href='https://twitter.com/datajournalism' target='blank'>@datajournalism</a> are well socially connected, confirming the local observations.
		</p>
	</div>
</div>
<h2>Analysis #02</h2>
<h2>The geography of voices (who is missing)</h2>
<div class='section'>
	<h2>Description</h2>
	<div class='texts'>
		<p>
			The analysis explores the geographical distribution of the data journalism community. In addition, it will analyse the factors that may influence the formation of communities on Twitter in Europe, the US, Nigeria and Brazil, and the reasons why some regions are missing from this space.
		</p>
	</div>
	<h2>Question</h2>
	<div class='texts'>
		<p>
			What is the geography of these voices, and who is missing from this space.
		</p>
	</div>
	<h2>Research protocol</h2>
	<div class='texts'>
		<p></p>
	</div>
	<h2>Findings</h2>
	<h2>The main countries in the communities</h2>
	<h5>Overview</h5>
	<div class='texts'>
		<p>
			The accounts located in the European countries and in the US constitute the majority of the 197 users in the communities and have a relatively close connection with users inside and outside their cluster. Also, the most mentioned ones and the top mentioners are mainly from these regions, suggesting the importance of European and American organizations in the data journalism Twitter environment.
		</p>
		<p>
			In parallel, the accounts from other parts of the world, like Nigeria and Brazil, tend to interact within their cluster, except for some local organisations being mentioned by international accounts. 
		</p>
		<p>
			The absence of voices from most of the countries on other continents may suggest that these countries have not built up a Data Journalism system of international relevance. 
		</p>
	</div>
	<div class='subsection'>
		<div class='texts'>
			<h5>Brazil</h5>
			<p>
				In recent years, the availability of open data in Brazil significantly increased. Since the introduction of the Freedom of Information law in 2012, the country has been recognized as a leader in disclosing government data (Faleiros, 2012), and its government demonstrated concern over the improvement of information disclosure and transparency, to facilitate the public scrutiny and encourage democratic participation. 
			</p>
			<p>
				Data journalism saw its rise since the Access to Information Act came into force in 2012. Journalists gather at conferences and regular events where they can share information and help each other learn new methods (Kunova, 2018). The School of Data Brazil (@EscoladeDados in C0) found the main Data Journalism conference in Brazil, supporting community meet-ups and training more than 6,000 people.
			</p>
		</div>
	</div>
	<div class='subsection'>
		<div class='texts'>
			<h5>Nigeria</h5>
			<p>
				C5 is characterised by Nigerian nonprofit investigative news agencies, data journalism organizations and civic tech organizations. These groups have developed a network and work collaboratively to improve journalism. In Nigeria, corruption has permeated almost every sector of the economy, and has been a contributing factor to the current dwindling nature of the country’s economy. Therefore, the fight against corruption is one of the top priorities of the Government and the whole society, and investigative journalism plays a crucial role. Many organizations have trained journalists to expose bad-habits and combat corruption. However, despite tremendous improvements in computer and internet technology, many reporters still ‘struggle to work at this crucial intersection of journalism and numbers’ (Adebajo,2020)
			</p>
			<p>
				In order to fill the vacuum of data-driven conversations in some underreported sectors in Nigeria, Joshua Olufemi (@jayangbayi, C5) founded Dataphyte (@dataphyte, C5), a startup focusing on data-driven storytelling (Adebajo,2020). Olufemi worked for Premium Times Centre for Investigative Journalism (@ptcij) and has experience in journalism. 
				Although Dataphyte shares some similarities with BudgIT (@BudgITng), it is the first organization in Nigeria which treats data journalism as the core of its work and dedicates to combine journalism with open data.
			</p>
		</div>
	</div>
	<div class='subsection'>
		<div class='texts'>
			<h5>Europe and the United States</h5>
			<p>
				The world has witnessed a domination of western model in media education and practice. This hegemony on the mass media was long seen by the Western world, especially Europe and the United States, where complete media systems have been built. The Western models of teaching and practicing journalism are also imported to other regions in the world. For example, Dataphyte was inspired by FiveThirtyEight (@FiveThirtyEight), a US-based establishment that uses statistical analysis to tell the stories (Adebajo,2020), while J-Forum, an event to develop Japanese journalists’ skills and knowledge of investigative reporting, was prompted by organizations like Investigative Reporters and Editors (@IRE_NICAR) in the US and the Global Investigative Journalism Network (@gijn) (Alecci, 2020).
			</p>
			<p>
				Some organizations located in Europe and the US not only focus on regional affairs, but also look to matters of global reach. The Global Investigative Journalism Conference held by GIJN is the world’s largest international gathering of investigative reporters. By focusing on skills and training, the conferences help to spread state-of-the-art data journalism and promote cross-border collaboration around the world. Accounts like @gijn and @datajournalism also play an important role in connecting journalists and organizations around the world by frequently mentioning and being mentioned by these accounts.  
			</p>
		</div>
	</div>
	<div class='texts'>
		<h2>Missing voices</h2>
		<p>
			While major western media such as the BBC and New York Times build their Data Journalism teams with cutting-edge methods, most of the  Asian accounts are either posting content that has low connection with data journalism or limited in number. Japan and China are taken as two examples to illustrate why some countries may be considered the missing voices in this research. 
		</p>
	</div>
	<div class='subsection'>
		<div class='texts'>
			<h5>Japan</h5>
			<p>
				As one of the most frequently used social media platforms in Japan (Bigbeat, 2020), Twitter is supposed to be the seedbed of all kinds of interactions, including data journalism. However, Japanese accounts seemed to be uninfluential. The reasons behind this are fourfold: terminological rift, talent cultivation difference, digitalisation lag, and limitation in information freedom. 
			</p>
			<p>
				In the researched dataset, nearly 78% of the Japanese tweets are about the promotion and users’ discussion of Rekordbox, a disc jockey software. The abbreviations of disc jockey (DJ) and Rekordbox’s new product DDJ-400 and share the same hashtags, but with different meanings.  Aside from this misinterpretation, the idea of journalism in Japan is different from Western countries. The Japanese practitioners who are defined as journalists in Western countries usually consider themselves Kisha (reporter) or employed (Hayashi and Kopper, 2014, p1144).
			</p>
			<p>
				A Japanese recently graduated student from Kanagawa University was interviewed to better understand the context. He pointed out that students aiming to be journalists would choose majors in Advertising. Despite their impressive educational backgrounds, elite journalists in Japan mainly gain their skills from practise, because of the lacking disciplinary learning experiences (Hayashi and Kopper, 2014, p1140-1141). Moreover, the japanese apprenticeship tradition makes it hard to grasp digital tools.
			</p>
			<p>
				Yagi (2020) stated that compared with Asian countries like China, South Korea and Singapore, the status quo of Japan’s digital economy is left behind, which leads to the lack of awareness and demand for data-oriented products. As a result, Japan has not enough drive to build journalism tools, and lacks  professionals who can handle digitalisation.
			</p>
			<p>
				Regardless of the law’s requirements on transparency, the majority officials and politicians don’t hand down information to the public (Hayashi and Kopper, 2014, p1144). They prefer organising conferences and interviews to practitioners within the Kisha-kurabu system, that is,  an arrangement by which news-gathering activities are administered by the editorial offices of the member companies of the NSK (Hayashi and Kopper, 2014, p1143), a prominent national journalism award in Japan. 
			</p>
			<p>
				The concept of public information seems to be absent in Japan, its Freedom of information Act failed to facilitate journalists to access statistics. Japan’s recent State Secrets Law also imposed a negative impact on press freedom due to its blur of ‘personal information’ and ‘privacy’ (Alecci, 2020). Thus, limited access to governmental and public information also contributes to data journalism’s low profile in Japan.
			</p>
		</div>
	</div>
	<div class='subsection'>
		<div class='texts'>
			<h5>China</h5>
			<p>
				Most of the few Chinese tweets detected in the dataset encourage people to learn data journalism skills and tools. It is safe to say that this term has a shared meaning in English and Chinese context.
			</p>
			<p>
				However, for Chinese users, Twitter is not as accessible as other local microblog services such as Sina Weibo. Concomitantly, the data journalism environment is beginning to take shape in Sina Weibo owing to professional accounts’ emerging, among which include Pictorial Digital Room with 774 thousand followers.
				<span class="TODO">TODO</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				By consequence, Twitter may not be the only suitable research environment for data journalism since it is not the most prevalent social media platform in some countries other than Europe and America. Hallin and Mancini (2012, p.280) stated that detailed empirical analysis of particular media systems in their own historical and structural context is essential to conceptualising them. To explore data journalism’s development in nations whose media landscapes differentiate from the Euro-Atlantic media system, applying tailored research objects and methods provides more flexibility and authenticity.  In general, data journalism discussion clusters remain a rather exclusive niche group that requires educational, financial, and digital resources, leading to the situation that they scatter unevenly around the world.
			</p>
		</div>
	</div>
</div>
<h2>Conclusions</h2>
<div class='section'>
	<div class='texts'>
		<p></p>
		<p></p>
		<p></p>
		<span class="TODO">TODO</span>
	</div>
</div>
